# activeInterfaceWaves

This is the pseduo spectral solver built atop the cuPSS library (arXiv:2405.02410) availabe at https://github.com/fcaballerop/cuPSS (v0.0.1) to solve continuum field equations for a mixture of active liquid crystals and a passive isotropic fluid in 2D on a regular lattice. 

Using the cuPSS library, we can solve generic stochastic PDEs. Here, I only include the solver (solvers/model_ALLPS_gravity) for the equations described below, as discussed in (arXiv:2407.04196).

To use this solver, and the cuPSS library in general, the follwing dependencies are required:
- CUDA toolkit (11+)
- cuFFT
- cuRAND
- FFTW3

Once downloaded, you can compile the solver and the required src/ code using the included compile file comp.sh as:
```
./comp.sh -s model_ALLPS_gravity
```
This compiles the solver "model_ALLPS_gravity" to bin/ which will then be used to solve the equations necessary to describe phase separation between an active and a passive fluid.

The compiled solver can then be conveniently run using:
```
./run/run_interfaceWaves.sh
```
This solves the model equations in 2D (described below) for the default parameters selected from solvers/model_ALLPS_gravity/default_parameters.txt and edited parametres listed in run/run_interfaceWaves.sh

It will instantiate an output directory, outDir = projects/interfaceWaves/{dirTree}. Here, {dirTree} can be modified in run_interfaceWaves.sh and is typically labelled using a subset of parameter values.
This will output all the simulation parameters used in outDir/sim_parameters.txt and the solver name/location in outDir/logf.txt. 
Additional details can be included in the log file from run_interfaceWaves.sh.
By default, only the phase field data is included in the output to outDir/data as csv files for each time step saved. Additional fields can be included in the output by modifying model_ALLPS_gravity.cu.

# Continuum model

The paramers names in the code are slighlty different than the ones used in the manuscript to remain more desriptive. Additionally, the parameter values are set in simulation friendly term, where the lattice spacing is typically set to 1.0. While geenrting the final figures used in the mansucript, we transalte to the parameter values into physical units as desribed in the paper. 

The model is described in terms of a phase field $\phi$ describing the relative concentrations of the two fluid phases, a nematic tensor field $Q$ to describe the local orientation order, and a flow field $v$ as a Stokes' flow generated by $\phi, Q$:

$$\partial_t \phi + v \cdot \nabla \phi = M \nabla^2 (a_\phi \phi + b_\phi \phi^3 + \kappa_\phi \nabla^2 \phi), $$

$$\partial_t Q = \lambda A  - \omega\cdot Q + Q\cdot \omega +\dfrac{1}{\gamma_Q} H, $$

$$0 = \eta \nabla^2 v - \nabla P + \nabla \cdot \sigma + f_g,$$

where the flow is assumed to be incompressible ($\nabla \cdot v = 0$). $A_{ij} = \dfrac{1}{2} (\partial_i v_j + \partial_j v_i ), \omega_{ij} = \dfrac{1}{2} (\partial_i v_j - \partial_j v_i )$ are the strain rate and the vorticity of the flow field respectively. The nematic molecular field, 
$$H_{ij} = a_Q \tilde{\phi} Q_{ij} + b_Q \rm{Tr}{Q^2} Q_{ij} + K_Q \nabla^2 Q_{ij},$$
is derived from a Landau-de Gennes free energy. With $\phi_0 = \sqrt{-a_\phi/b_\phi}, \tilde{\phi} = (1+\phi/\phi_0)/2$ is the volume fraction of the active phase.


The stress in the Stokes equation consists of the capillary stress ($\sigma^\phi$), elastic stress ($\sigma^e$) and the active stresses ($\sigma^a$) as:
$$\sigma_{ij}^\phi = -\hat{k_\phi} (\nabla_i \phi \nabla_j \phi - \frac12 \delta_{ij} (\nabla \phi)^2)$$
$$\sigma_{ij}^e = -\lambda H_{ij} + Q_{ik} H_{kj} - H_{ik}Q_{kj}$$
$$\sigma_{ij}^a = \alpha \tilde{\phi} Q_{ij}$$

# Interface Waves and Structure factor:

As desribed in detail in Sec IV in the manuscript, (https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.04196), we extract the interface height field $h(x, t)$ from the phase field data, and compute a time averaged dynamical structure factor. 

In this project, in addition to the source code for running the simulations, we include the height field data used to construct the structure factors shared in the manuscript. 
This summary data (for the parameter values included in the manuscript) is included under analysis_interfaceWaves/heightFieldData/

Since these are relatively large files containing the interface height data (~160 M each), to be able to use these for analysis, you need to ensure the git large files system is installed befoer cloning the repo. This can be done with the follwing steps:
1. Ensure git lfs is installed:
```
curl -s https://packagecloud.io/install/repositories/github/git-lfs/script.deb.sh | sudo bash
sudo apt install git-lfs
```
2. Initialize git lfs:
```
git lfs install
```
3. Clone the repository:
```
git clone https://github.com/paarthgulati/activeInterfaceWaves_cuPSS
```

This will ensure that the jupyter notebook (analysis_interfaceWaves/) can be run using the hieght field data to generate the dynamical structure factors included in the paper.

We additionally include sample python scripts than can be used to extract the included height field data from the phase field data output fo the simulations (not included). As described in the text this is done by fitting $\tanh(y-y_0)$ as a function of $x, t.$
